Hello friends
In this video let us do a comparison of
adjacency matrix and adjacency list representation of the graph
So before getting started with this first let us learn what
is said dense graph and what is sparse graph
So a dense graph is a graph Where the number
of edges are close to the maximum number of edges
or which is almost equal to V square and see
this graph here every word Text connected to each other
Hence we can call this as a dense graph
So what will be a sparse graph It will be
a graph for the number of adjacent close to
the minimal number of edges or which is almost equal
to V say this graph here the vertices are connected
sparsely
Hence we can call this as sparse graph
Let us understand which is the best method to represent
the dense graph and this sparse graph
So let us take the graph of 5 vertices
So we equal to five here So it will be
a V by V matrix
So the space complexity will be order of V
square that his order five square that is order of
25 if you use adjacency List to represent
this graph the space complexity will be order of V plus
E because it will be V less with a total
of E
edges that is order of five plus seven which
is order of 12 and to add a New Edge in
adjacency matrix to add edge from 0 to 1
you have to go to row zero and column one
and set the value as one
So a constant time is only required that is order
of one time will be needed
That is to set that particular position as one and
in case of adjacency list
Adding a new edge will take order of one time
if the node is added at the beginning of the
list
So both representations take the same time and to check
whether an edge excess or not
In the graph in adjacency matrix we only need
to check if that position is one
For example to check whether the edge from 0 to
3 exist go to row zero column three and the
value here is one
So the edge exist and if it was zero
Then we can understand that the edge does not exist in the
graph
So the time Taken is an order of one again
And here in adjacency list
If the Vertex has K nodes in the list we
have to traverse the list to find that node so
it will take order of K time so it is
order of one in adjacency matrix and order of
K in adjacency list and to remove an edge
from the graph in adjacency matrix
We can set that particular position in the matrix as
zero for example to remove the edge from 0 to
3 go to row zero column three and set the
value as zero
So again the time complexity is order of one
And in the adjacency list
First we have to find the node in the list
and then deleted so it will take order of K
time again
So for adjacency matrix it is order of one
and for adjacency list it is order of K
And what if we want to add a new vertex
in the graph For example if we want to add
one more vertex in this graph that is a total
of six vertices
Then we need to create a six by six matrix
and then we need to copy the old edge matrix
to the new one
So the time complexity is order of V square that
is six square that is order of 36 adding
adjacency list to add a new Vertex
It will take order of one time only because we
can simply increase the size dynamically so it is order
of K in matrix and order of one in list
representation
So what can we conclude from these observations If the
graph is done we can use adjacency matrix
representation as the graph will at most have V square
edges so it can effectively Utilize matrix
Also many operations such as add edge remove edge find edge will
take order of one time only
And if the graph is passed we can use adjacency
list representation
If we use the adjacency
matrix here it will not utilise all the spaces
so we should use adjacency list representation as it
takes or drop V plus E space
But some of the operations such as fine edge remove
edge will take order K time if the vertex has K edges